[ML] adding support for composite aggs in anomaly detection (#69970)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/ml/anomaly-detection/ml-configuring-aggregations.asciidoc

aggregated data into the {ml-features} instead of raw results, which
reduces the volume of data that must be considered while detecting anomalies.

> TIP: If you use a terms aggregation and the cardinality of a term is high, you

Author: @szabosteve Mind reviewing all these doc updates? Its pretty encompassing.

aggregated data into the {ml-features} instead of raw results, which
reduces the volume of data that must be considered while detecting anomalies.

TIP: If you use a terms aggregation and the cardinality of a term is high but
still significantly less than your total number of documents, use composite
aggregations

> experimental:[support for composite aggregations inside datafeeds is currently experimental].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experimental:[Support for composite aggregations inside datafeeds is currently experimental].
```

[discrete]
[[aggs-limits-dfeeds]]
== Requirements and limitations

There are some limitations to using aggregations in {dfeeds}.

Your aggregation must include a `date_histogram` aggregation or a top level `composite` aggregation,
which in turn must contain a `max` aggregation on the time field.
This requirement ensures that the aggregated data is a time series and the timestamp
of each bucket is the time of the last record in the bucket.

IMPORTANT: The name of the aggregation and the name of the field that the agg
operates on need to match, otherwise the aggregation doesn't work. For example,
if you use a `max` aggregation on a time field called `responsetime`, the name
of the aggregation must be also `responsetime`.

You must consider the interval of the `date_histogram` or `composite`
aggregation carefully. The bucket span of your {anomaly-job} must be divisible
by the value of the `calendar_interval` or `fixed_interval` in your aggregation
(with no remainder). If you specify a `frequency` for your {dfeed},
it must also be divisible by this interval. {anomaly-jobs-cap} cannot use
`date_histogram` or `composite` aggs with an interval measured in months

> because the length of the month is not fixed. {dfeeds-cap} tolerate weeks or smaller units.

Reviewer: The use of "tolerate" and the use of "jobs" in one sentence and "datafeeds" in the other seemed unnecessarily confusing. I think it's clearer to say something like this:
```suggestion
because the length of the month is not fixed; they can use weeks or smaller units.
```

                "fixed_interval": "360s",
                "time_zone": "UTC"
              }
            }
          },
          {
            "airline": {  <3>
              "terms": {
                "field": "airline"
              }
            }
          }
        ]
      },
      "aggregations": {
        "time": {  <4>
          "max": {
            "field": "time"
          }
        },
        "responsetime": { <5>
          "avg": {
            "field": "responsetime"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------
// TEST[skip:setup:farequote_job]

<1> Provide the `size` to the composite agg to control how many resources
are used when aggregated the data. A larger `size` means a faster datafeed but
more cluster resources are utilized when searching.
<2> The required `date_histogram` composite aggregation source. Make sure it
is named differently than your desired time field.
<3> Instead of utilizing a regular `term` aggregation, adding a composite
aggregation `term` source with the name `airline` works. Note its name
is the same as the field.
<4> The required `max` aggregation whose name is the time field in the

> job analysis config

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
job analysis config.
```

----------------------------------
// TEST[skip:setup:farequote_job]

<1> The aggregations have names that match the fields that they operate on. The
`max` aggregation is named `time` and its field also needs to be `time`.
<2> The `term` aggregation is named `airline` and its field is also named
`airline`.
<3> The `avg` aggregation is named `responsetime` and its field is also named
`responsetime`.

TIP: If you are utilizing a `term` aggregation to gather influencer or partition

> detector field information, consider using a `composite` aggregation. It performs

Reviewer: > partition detector field information...

Is this the partition_field_name value from the job config?  I've never seen it called a "partition detector field", so unless this is something else, I'd recommend sticking with just "partition field".

Author: yeah, I think my brain just wanted to make word salad :)

> detector field information, consider using a `composite` aggregation. It performs

Author: ```suggestion
field information, consider using a `composite` aggregation. It performs
```

better than a `date_histogram` with a nested `term` aggregation and also includes
all the values of the field instead of the top values per bucket.

[discrete]
[[aggs-using-composite]]
=== Using composite aggregations in {anomaly-jobs}

experimental::[]

For `composite` aggregation support, there must be exactly one `date_histogram` value
source. That value source must not be sorted in descending order. Additional
`composite` aggregation value sources are allowed, such as `terms`.

NOTE: `composite` aggregations may not be as performant as a scrolling or

> `date_histogram` oriented {dfeed}. `composite` aggregations are optimized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date histogram aggregations. Composite aggregations are optimized
```

for queries that are either `match_all` or `range` filters. Other types of
queries may cause the `composite` aggregation to be ineffecient.

> Here is an example utilizing a `composite` aggregation instead of a

Reviewer: Not mandatory, but feels like an "uses" is simpler to understand and translate:
```suggestion
Here is an example that uses a `composite` aggregation instead of a
```

`date_histogram`.

> Assuming the same job configuration as above.

Reviewer: > Assuming the same job configuration as above.

I think we'll eventually need to number these examples and perhaps even add anchors so that it's clear which are being referred to.

This is an example of a datafeed utilizing a `composite` aggregation to bucket
the metrics based on time and terms:

[source,console]
----------------------------------
PUT _ml/datafeeds/datafeed-farequote-composite
{
  "job_id": "farequote-composite",
  "indices": [
    "farequote"
  ],
  "aggregations": {
    "buckets": {
      "composite": {
        "size": 1000,  <1>
        "sources": [
          {
            "time_bucket": {  <2>
              "date_histogram": {
                "field": "time",
                "fixed_interval": "360s",
                "time_zone": "UTC"
              }
            }
          },
          {
            "airline": {  <3>
              "terms": {
                "field": "airline"
              }
            }
          }
        ]
      },
      "aggregations": {
        "time": {  <4>
          "max": {
            "field": "time"
          }
        },
        "responsetime": { <5>
          "avg": {
            "field": "responsetime"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------
// TEST[skip:setup:farequote_job]

<1> Provide the `size` to the composite agg to control how many resources

> are used when aggregated the data. A larger `size` means a faster datafeed but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are used when aggregating the data. A larger `size` means a faster datafeed but
```

more cluster resources are utilized when searching.
<2> The required `date_histogram` composite aggregation source. Make sure it
is named differently than your desired time field.
<3> Instead of utilizing a regular `term` aggregation, adding a composite
aggregation `term` source with the name `airline` works. Note its name
is the same as the field.
<4> The required `max` aggregation whose name is the time field in the
job analysis config.
<5> The `avg` aggregation is named `responsetime` and its field is also named
`responsetime`.

[discrete]
[[aggs-dfeeds]]
== Nested aggregations in {dfeeds}

{dfeeds-cap} support complex nested aggregations. This example uses the
`derivative` pipeline aggregation to find the first order derivative of the
counter `system.network.out.bytes` for each value of the field `beat.name`.

> NOTE: `derivative` or other pipeline aggregations may not work within `composite`

Reviewer: > NOTE: `derivative` or other pipeline aggregations may not work within `composite` ...

Can we provide more information about when/why they might not work?

Author: I added a link to the composite agg docs referencing pipeline aggs.

> NOTE: `derivative` or other pipeline aggregations may not work within `composite`
> aggregations.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: `derivative` or other pipeline aggregations may not work within `composite`
aggregations. See <<composite aggregations and pipeline aggs,search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation.html#_pipeline_aggregations>>

```

          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----------------------------------
// TEST[skip:setup:farequote_job]

<1> Provide the `size` to the composite agg to control how many resources
are used when aggregating the data. A larger `size` means a faster datafeed but
more cluster resources are used when searching.
<2> The required `date_histogram` composite aggregation source. Make sure it
is named differently than your desired time field.
<3> Instead of using a regular `term` aggregation, adding a composite
aggregation `term` source with the name `airline` works. Note its name
is the same as the field.
<4> The required `max` aggregation whose name is the time field in the
job analysis config.
<5> The `avg` aggregation is named `responsetime` and its field is also named
`responsetime`.

[discrete]
[[aggs-dfeeds]]
== Nested aggregations in {dfeeds}

{dfeeds-cap} support complex nested aggregations. This example uses the
`derivative` pipeline aggregation to find the first order derivative of the
counter `system.network.out.bytes` for each value of the field `beat.name`.

NOTE: `derivative` or other pipeline aggregations may not work within `composite`
aggregations. See

> {ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation-pipeline-aggregations.html[composite aggregations and pipeline aggregations].

Reviewer 2: @benwtrent Sorry, just realized that `search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation-pipeline-aggregations` is a section on a page called `search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation`. My suggestion below should fix the docs build. Now for real.
```suggestion
{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation.html#search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation-pipeline-aggregations[composite aggregations and pipeline aggregations].
```

> {ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation-pipeline-aggregations.html [composite aggregations and pipeline aggregations].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation-pipeline-aggregations.html[composite aggregations and pipeline aggregations].
```

[[aggs-define-dfeeds]]
== Defining aggregations in {dfeeds}

When you define an aggregation in a {dfeed}, it must have one of the following forms:

> When using a `date_histogram` aggregation to bucket by time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using a `date_histogram` aggregation to bucket by time:
```

----------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

> When using a `composite` aggregation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using a `composite` aggregation:
```

[source,js]
----------------------------------
"aggregations": {
  "composite_agg": {
    "sources": [
      {
        "date_histogram_agg": {
          "field": "time",
          ...settings...
        }
      },
      ...other valid sources...
      ],
      ...composite agg settings...,
      "aggregations": {
        "timestamp": {
            "max": {
              "field": "time"
            }
          },
          ...other aggregations...
          [
            [,"aggregations" : {
              [<sub_aggregation>]+
            } ]
          }]
      }
   }
}
----------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

The top level aggregation must be either a
{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket.html[bucket aggregation] containing as single
sub-aggregation that is a `date_histogram`, the top level aggregation is the

> required `date_histogram`, or the top leve aggregation is the required `composite`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
required `date_histogram`, or the top level aggregation is the required `composite`.
```

There must be exactly one `date_histogram` or `composite` aggregation. For more information, see
{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-datehistogram-aggregation.html[Date histogram aggregation] and
{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation.html[Composite aggregation].

NOTE: The `time_zone` parameter in the date histogram aggregation must be set to
`UTC`, which is the default value.

Each histogram or composite bucket has a key, which is the bucket start time.
This key cannot be used for aggregations in {dfeeds}, however, because
they need to know the time of the latest record within a bucket.
Otherwise, when you restart a {dfeed}, it continues from the start time of the
histogram or composite bucket and possibly fetches the same data twice.
The max aggregation for the time field is therefore necessary to provide
the time of the latest record within a bucket.

You can optionally specify a terms aggregation, which creates buckets for
different values of a field.

> TIP: Instead of nesting a `term` aggregation, try using `composite` aggs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TIP: Instead of nesting a `term` aggregation, use `composite` aggs.
```

----------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

When using a `composite` aggregation:

[source,js]
----------------------------------
"aggregations": {
  "composite_agg": {
    "sources": [
      {
        "date_histogram_agg": {
          "field": "time",
          ...settings...
        }
      },
      ...other valid sources...
      ],
      ...composite agg settings...,
      "aggregations": {
        "timestamp": {
            "max": {
              "field": "time"
            }
          },
          ...other aggregations...
          [
            [,"aggregations" : {
              [<sub_aggregation>]+
            } ]
          }]
      }
   }
}
----------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

> The top level aggregation must be either a

Reviewer: Since there are more than two options now, we can't use "either". Perhaps it's clearer now as a list:
```suggestion
The top level aggregation must be one of the following:
```

> {ref}/search-aggregations-bucket.html[bucket aggregation] containing as single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  A {ref}/search-aggregations-bucket.html[bucket aggregation] containing a single
```

> sub-aggregation that is a `date_histogram`, the top level aggregation is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sub-aggregation that is a `date_histogram`
```

Author: I may be missing something, but removing `, the top level aggregation is the` misses the point. 

The requirements are:

- A `date_histogram` sub aggregation
- A top level `date_histogram` aggregation
- A top level `composite` aggregation

These are all exclusive requirements. No overlap is allowed and exactly one should be satisfied.

Author: @lcawl I think i have fixed this now :). Please take another look when you can.

> required `date_histogram`, or the top level aggregation is the required `composite`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The required `date_histogram` aggregation
*  The required `composite` aggregation
```

{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-datehistogram-aggregation.html[Date histogram aggregation] and
{ref}/search-aggregations-bucket-composite-aggregation.html[Composite aggregation].

NOTE: The `time_zone` parameter in the date histogram aggregation must be set to
`UTC`, which is the default value.

Each histogram or composite bucket has a key, which is the bucket start time.
This key cannot be used for aggregations in {dfeeds}, however, because
they need to know the time of the latest record within a bucket.
Otherwise, when you restart a {dfeed}, it continues from the start time of the
histogram or composite bucket and possibly fetches the same data twice.
The max aggregation for the time field is therefore necessary to provide
the time of the latest record within a bucket.

You can optionally specify a terms aggregation, which creates buckets for
different values of a field.

IMPORTANT: If you use a terms aggregation, by default it returns buckets for
the top ten terms. Thus if the cardinality of the term is greater than 10, not
all terms are analyzed. In this case, consider using `composite` aggs

> experimental:[composite agg support in datafeeds is currently experimental]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experimental:[Support for composite aggregations inside datafeeds is currently experimental].
```
